Roughly 50% of people will break a bone
at some point in their lives.
But whether the cause is as mundane
as a slip on the ice
or as dramatic as a
tightrope-walking accident,
broken bones tend to heal the same way.
The human body's 200 plus bones
come in many shapes and sizes,
referred to by medical professionals
as short bones, long bones, flat bones,
and the catch-all category
of irregular bones.
Despite their differences,
bones generally have a rigid structure
composed of a protein matrix
that’s dotted with bone cells
and reinforced with minerals
containing calcium.
Inside these stiff exteriors
is spongy marrow,
containing stem cells that can divide
and differentiate
into specialized cell types.
Bones are also penetrated
by blood vessels and nerves,
which relay the searing pain
signal associated with the break.
Since these nerves are encased in hard
tissue they’re very difficult to study,
so we still don't know exactly
why broken bones hurt so much.
But we do know that long bones
are the most likely to break
since they often take the brunt
of the impact from a fall.
Whether an accident causes a clean break
or a splintering crack,
any kind of fracture makes the
blood vessels inside the bone rupture,
causing internal bleeding
and inflammation.
This signals the body to start the
first step of the healing process:
the inflammatory phase.
For the next week, the body floods
the injury site with immune cells
which remove damaged tissue
and help prepare the site
for healthy new tissue to grow.
The cells also release signaling molecules
that recruit stem cells to the area.
As they arrive, these stem cells
differentiate into chondrocytes.
These cells use the clotted blood
at the break site
as a scaffold to build callus
made of cartilage.
Cartilage can grow very quickly,
making it a useful temporary patch.
But it’s much weaker than bone,
so over the following weeks,
some of the chondrocytes
and stem cells develop
into special bone-building cells
called osteoblasts
that can create a stronger bony callus.
Once the bony callus is complete,
the remodeling phase can begin.
Over the next few months,
another type of cell eats away
at the bony callus
as osteoblasts lay down new bone tissue.
This phase is where most
of the bone healing happens,
restoring the injury site
to its previous shape.
But the healing timeline varies
widely depending on a patient's diet,
how much rest they’re getting,
and how messy the break is.
A clean break generally heals the fastest,
and doctors use casts and splints
to keep bones aligned as they heal.
But if the bone has been splintered
into tiny fragments
and significantly displaced,
surgery may be required
to put those pieces back in place.
And if a bone does heal while misaligned,
a surgeon would need to refracture it,
realign it,
and then use pins, plates, or screws
to hold the bone together.
When the remodelling phase is over,
there may be a slight bump
at the fracture site,
but this typically resolves over time,
leaving the bone just
as strong as it was before.
Naturally, the strength of our bones
varies from person to person.
And older populations are more likely
to break their bones in the first place,
since bone density tends
to decrease with age.
Researchers are still
investigating why this happens,
but fortunately, we already know
the best way to keep bones strong.
Even when they aren’t healing,
bones are constantly remodeling—
adjusting their density and strength
to the amount of force
they’re typically under.
So exercises like walking, running,
and weightlifting
all stimulate your bones
to grow denser.
Just make sure whatever activity
you're doing is relatively safe,
because there’s nothing humorous
about a broken humerus.